README.md, before:

# ECU-1270 Yocto Layer introduction

The goal of this project is to open source the Advantech ECU-1270 Linux project.
We intend to release our changes as a yocto meta-layer on top of the standard TI Yocto project, so customizations would be more obvious.

## Download standard TI Yocto project and setup environment

```sh
> git clone https://git.ti.com/git/arago-project/oe-layersetup.git ti-yocto
> cd ./ti-yocto/ && ./oe-layertool-setup.sh -f configs/processor-sdk-linux/processor-sdk-linux-10_01_08_01.txt
> cd ./build/ && source ./conf/setenv
> export MACHINE=j722s-ecu1270  

#https://software-dl.ti.com/jacinto7/esd/processor-sdk-linux-am67/09_02_00_04/exports/docs/linux/Overview_Building_the_SDK.html
```

## Add the ECU-1270 customized meta layer

Download the yocto meta layer from this git repostory and place it under the "source" directory

```sh
> ls ../sources/meta-ecu-1270/conf/machine/
j722s-ecu1270.conf  j722s-ecu1270-k3r5.conf  j722s.inc

> bitbake-layers add-layer ../sources/meta-ecu-1270/
```

## Build Yocto

> [!NOTE]
> On Ubuntu 24.04 hosts, AppAromor settings needs to be adjusted before building Yocto.
> 
> ```console
> foo@bar:~/$ sudo sh -c 'echo 0 > /proc/sys/kernel/apparmor_restrict_unprivileged_userns'
> ```

> [!TIP]
> Edit __local.conf__ based on your host resource.  
> Building Yocto, with the default configure, is very memory consuming. At least 32 GBytes of RAM will be needed.  
> With insufficient RAM, the building process will fail.
> Therefore, limiting the maximum parallel processes allowed, migth be a good idea.
> One may do so by adding the following parameters to **"build/config/local.conf"**
> 
> ```sh
> PARALLEL_MAKE = "-j 2"
> BB_NUMBER_THREADS = "2"
> ```

```sh
> bitbake -k tisdk-base-image
```

The image will be located in the "build/tmp/eploy-ti/images/j722s-ecu1270/" folder.  
The wic image is named: tisdk-base-image-j722s-ecu1270.rootfs.wic.xz  

## Build Kernel only (linux-imx or virtual/kernel)

```sh
> bitbake linux-ti-staging
```

## Deploy Yocto image to SD

```sh
> xzcat tisdk-base-image-j722s-ecu1270.rootfs.wic.xz | sudo dd of=/dev/sdc bs=1M iflag=fullblock oflag=direct conv=fsync
```

# Setup SecureBoot

## Setup environment

A tool called "OTP_KEYWRITER" will be needed to setup SecureBoot.  
This tool is actually an addon app to the "MCU+ SDK for J722S"; therefore, 
Start by downloading the [PROCESSOR-SDK-RTOS-J722S](https://www.ti.com/tool/PROCESSOR-SDK-J722S) tar file, and the "MCU_PLUS_SDK" folder can be found inside.  
It also depends on [CCS](https://www.ti.com/tool/CCSTUDIO) and [SYSCONFIG](https://www.ti.com/tool/SYSCONFIG).  
Download and install them to the default loacation at "~/ti/", which we will refer as "MCU_PLUS_SDK_INSTALL_DIR" in the future. 

## Install keywriter

The OPT_KEYWRITER will be built spacific for each CPU arch, access the correct version via this portal: [https://www.ti.com/drr/opn/J7X-RESTRICTED-SECURITY](https://www.ti.com/drr/opn/J7X-RESTRICTED-SECURITY)   
This is a restricted software resource that requires a TI portal account & approval to access.  
After the correct OTP_KEYWRITER is aquired, at location <MCU_PLUS_SDK_INSTALL_DIR>/source , create an empty folder called "security" . Install the addon package at this location.

## Build Keywriter Certificates

Go to the directory: <MCU_PLUS_SDK_INSTALL_DIR>/source/security/sbl_keywriter/scripts/cert_gen/j722s/
Create the Certificates with the following command:  

```sh
> ./gen_keywr_cert.sh -g
> cp -rf keys/* keys_devel/
```

These files are also required by the Yocto project to sign the certified binaries, copy them to the "keys" folder under this "meta-ecu-1270" layer.

### Make a copy to the meta-ecu-1270/u-boot recipe

```sh
> cp -rf keys_devel <YOCTO_PATH>/sources/meta-ecu-1270/recipes-bsp/u-boot/files/keys/
```

## Build the tiboot3 binary running OTP_KEYWRITER

Create a tiboot3.bin by following the commands listed below, and copy it to a bootable SD created by the previous WIC image.

```sh
> cd <MCU_PLUS_SDK_INSTALL_DIR>/ti_mcu_sdk/ti-processor-sdk-rtos-j722s-evm-11_00_00_06/mcu_plus_sdk_j722s_11_00_00_12/source/security/sbl_keywriter/scripts/cert_gen/j722s
> ./gen_keywr_cert.sh -t tifek/SR_10/ti_fek_public.pem --msv 0xC0FFE -b keys_devel/v15/bmpk.pem --bmek keys_devel/bmek.key -s keys_devel/v15/smpk.pem --smek keys_devel/smek.key --keycnt 2 --keyrev 1
> cd <MCU_PLUS_SDK_INSTALL_DIR>/ti_mcu_sdk/ti-processor-sdk-rtos-j722s-evm-11_00_00_06/mcu_plus_sdk_j722s_11_00_00_12/source/security/sbl_keywriter/j722s-evm/wkup-r5fss0-0_nortos/ti-arm-clang
> make -sj clean PROFILE=debug
> make -sj PROFILE=debug
```

Before powering up the ECU unit, put a Jumper on __CN78__, and boot with the new tiboot3.bin and the following console output indicates the OTP has been programmed successfully.

```sh
Starting Keywriting
Enable VPP
DMSC Version 10.1.11-v10.01.11_j722s_keywriter
DMSC Firmware revision 0xa
DMSC API revision 4.0

keys Certificate found: 0x43c56280
Keywriter Debug Response: 0x0
Success Programming Keys
```

Afterwards, unplug the power and remove the jumper on __CN78__.

## Setup key files for Yocto

Create files by using OpenSSL utils to process the files, which we've copied from a [previous step](###Make a copy to the meta-ecu-1270/u-boot recipe)  

```sh
> cd <YOCTO_PATH>/sources/meta-ecu-1270/recipes-bsp/u-boot/files/keys/
> cp keys_devel/v15/smpk.pem ./custMpk.pem 
> cp custMpk.pem  custMpk.key
> openssl req -batch -new -x509 -key custMpk.key -out custMpk.crt
```

## Rebuild Yocto with Secure Boot

Use the following commands to clean build Yocto for creating a signed image.  

```sh
> bitbake -c cleansstate ti-k3-secdev-native u-boot-ti-staging ti-dm-fw trusted-firmware-a optee-os linux-ti-staging
> bitbake u-boot-ti-staging
> bitbake -c deploy mc:k3r5:u-boot-ti-staging   
```

Commit message:

update README.md uboot cmd for secure boot add uboot commmands on how to boot fit image

README.md, after:

# ECU-1270 Yocto Layer introduction

The goal of this project is to open source the Advantech ECU-1270 Linux project.
We intend to release our changes as a yocto meta-layer on top of the standard TI Yocto project, so customizations would be more obvious.

## Download standard TI Yocto project and setup environment

```sh
> git clone https://git.ti.com/git/arago-project/oe-layersetup.git ti-yocto
> cd ./ti-yocto/ && ./oe-layertool-setup.sh -f configs/processor-sdk-linux/processor-sdk-linux-10_01_08_01.txt
> cd ./build/ && source ./conf/setenv
> export MACHINE=j722s-ecu1270  
```

> [!NOTE]
> reference: https://software-dl.ti.com/jacinto7/esd/processor-sdk-linux-am67/09_02_00_04/exports/docs/linux/Overview_Building_the_SDK.html

## Add the ECU-1270 customized meta layer

Download the yocto meta layer from this git repostory and place it under the "source" directory

```sh
> ls ../sources/meta-ecu-1270/conf/machine/
j722s-ecu1270.conf  j722s-ecu1270-k3r5.conf  j722s.inc

> bitbake-layers add-layer ../sources/meta-ecu-1270/
```

## Build Yocto

> [!NOTE]
> On Ubuntu 24.04 hosts, AppAromor settings needs to be adjusted before building Yocto.
> 
> ```console
> foo@bar:~/$ sudo sh -c 'echo 0 > /proc/sys/kernel/apparmor_restrict_unprivileged_userns'
> ```

> [!TIP]
> Edit __local.conf__ based on your host resource.  
> Building Yocto, with the default configure, is very memory consuming. At least 32 GBytes of RAM will be needed.  
> With insufficient RAM, the building process will fail.
> Therefore, limiting the maximum parallel processes allowed, migth be a good idea.
> One may do so by adding the following parameters to **"build/config/local.conf"**
> 
> ```sh
> PARALLEL_MAKE = "-j 2"
> BB_NUMBER_THREADS = "2"
> ```

```sh
> bitbake -k tisdk-base-image
```

The image will be located in the "build/tmp/eploy-ti/images/j722s-ecu1270/" folder.  
The wic image is named: tisdk-base-image-j722s-ecu1270.rootfs.wic.xz  

## Build Kernel only (linux-imx or virtual/kernel)

```sh
> bitbake linux-ti-staging
```

## Deploy Yocto image to SD

```sh
> xzcat tisdk-base-image-j722s-ecu1270.rootfs.wic.xz | sudo dd of=/dev/sdc bs=1M iflag=fullblock oflag=direct conv=fsync
```

# Setup SecureBoot

## Setup environment

A tool called "OTP_KEYWRITER" will be needed to setup SecureBoot.  
This tool is actually an addon app to the "MCU+ SDK for J722S"; therefore, 
Start by downloading the [PROCESSOR-SDK-RTOS-J722S](https://www.ti.com/tool/PROCESSOR-SDK-J722S) tar file, and the "MCU_PLUS_SDK" folder can be found inside.  
It also depends on [CCS](https://www.ti.com/tool/CCSTUDIO) and [SYSCONFIG](https://www.ti.com/tool/SYSCONFIG).  
Download and install them to the default loacation at "~/ti/", which we will refer as "MCU_PLUS_SDK_INSTALL_DIR" in the future. 

## Install keywriter

The OPT_KEYWRITER will be built spacific for each CPU arch, access the correct version via this portal: [https://www.ti.com/drr/opn/J7X-RESTRICTED-SECURITY](https://www.ti.com/drr/opn/J7X-RESTRICTED-SECURITY)   
This is a restricted software resource that requires a TI portal account & approval to access.  
After the correct OTP_KEYWRITER is aquired, at location <MCU_PLUS_SDK_INSTALL_DIR>/source , create an empty folder called "security" . Install the addon package at this location.

## Build Keywriter Certificates

Go to the directory: <MCU_PLUS_SDK_INSTALL_DIR>/source/security/sbl_keywriter/scripts/cert_gen/j722s/
Create the Certificates with the following command:  

```sh
> ./gen_keywr_cert.sh -g
> cp -rf keys/* keys_devel/
```

These files are also required by the Yocto project to sign the certified binaries, copy them to the "keys" folder under this "meta-ecu-1270" layer.

### Make a copy to the meta-ecu-1270/u-boot recipe

```sh
> cp -rf keys_devel <YOCTO_PATH>/sources/meta-ecu-1270/recipes-bsp/u-boot/files/keys/
```

## Build the tiboot3 binary running OTP_KEYWRITER

Create a tiboot3.bin by following the commands listed below, and copy it to a bootable SD created by the previous WIC image.

```sh
> cd <MCU_PLUS_SDK_INSTALL_DIR>/ti_mcu_sdk/ti-processor-sdk-rtos-j722s-evm-11_00_00_06/mcu_plus_sdk_j722s_11_00_00_12/source/security/sbl_keywriter/scripts/cert_gen/j722s
> ./gen_keywr_cert.sh -t tifek/SR_10/ti_fek_public.pem --msv 0xC0FFE -b keys_devel/v15/bmpk.pem --bmek keys_devel/bmek.key -s keys_devel/v15/smpk.pem --smek keys_devel/smek.key --keycnt 2 --keyrev 1
> cd <MCU_PLUS_SDK_INSTALL_DIR>/ti_mcu_sdk/ti-processor-sdk-rtos-j722s-evm-11_00_00_06/mcu_plus_sdk_j722s_11_00_00_12/source/security/sbl_keywriter/j722s-evm/wkup-r5fss0-0_nortos/ti-arm-clang
> make -sj clean PROFILE=debug
> make -sj PROFILE=debug
```

Before powering up the ECU unit, put a Jumper on __CN78__, and boot with the new tiboot3.bin and the following console output indicates the OTP has been programmed successfully.

```sh
Starting Keywriting
Enable VPP
DMSC Version 10.1.11-v10.01.11_j722s_keywriter
DMSC Firmware revision 0xa
DMSC API revision 4.0

keys Certificate found: 0x43c56280
Keywriter Debug Response: 0x0
Success Programming Keys
```

Afterwards, unplug the power and remove the jumper on __CN78__.

## Setup key files for Yocto

Create files by using OpenSSL utils to process the files, which we've copied from a [previous step](###Make a copy to the meta-ecu-1270/u-boot recipe)  

```sh
> cd <YOCTO_PATH>/sources/meta-ecu-1270/recipes-bsp/u-boot/files/keys/
> cp keys_devel/v15/smpk.pem ./custMpk.pem 
> cp custMpk.pem  custMpk.key
> openssl req -batch -new -x509 -key custMpk.key -out custMpk.crt
```

## Rebuild Yocto with Secure Boot

Use the following commands to clean build Yocto for creating a signed image.  

```sh
> bitbake -c cleansstate ti-k3-secdev-native u-boot-ti-staging ti-dm-fw trusted-firmware-a optee-os linux-ti-staging
> bitbake u-boot-ti-staging
> bitbake -c deploy mc:k3r5:u-boot-ti-staging   
```

## Preparing the SD image
Uboot with Secure boot enabled will require to kernel and device tree to be encapsulated as a FIT file.  
Copy the newly generated images to the SD boot partition.  
```sh 
> cd <YOCTO_PATH>/build/deploy-ti/images/j722s-ecu1270
> cp fitImage--*.bin <SD_MNT_PATH>/boot/fitImage
> cp tiboot3-j722s-hs-evm.bin <SD_MNT_PATH>/boot/tiboot3.bin
> cp tispl.bin-j722s-ecu1270-* <SD_MNT_PATH>/boot/tispl.bin
> cp u-boot-j722s-ecu1270-*.img <SD_MNT_PATH>/boot/u-boot.img
> cp uEnv.txt <SD_MNT_PATH>/boot/uEnv.txt
```
## U-Boot Boot Command
The U-Boot can boot into the fit image and reference the device tree with the following commands:  
```sh
> setenv bootargs console=ttyS2,115200 root=/dev/mmcblk1p2 rw rootwait rootfstype=ext4
> load mmc 1:1 0x90000000 fitImage
> bootm 0x90000000#conf-ti_k3-j722s-ecu1270.dtb
```
